README.md, before:

# YeastLume
Repository for the YeastLume data pipeline. Follow the directions below to configure the repository for your own purposes.

# Installation and Use
Below are instructions on how to train a BBDM model with paired bright-field and fluorescence data.

### Local Requirements
- 512x512 three-channel .tif films
- Python 3.11+ (with pip)
- Rclone *(if pushing/pulling data)*

### Remote Requirements
- SLURM job scheduler
- Unix/Linux shell with CUDA GPU available
- Conda (via Anaconda3/2024.02-1)
- Rclone *(if pushing/pulling data)*

---

## 1. Setup Data Preparation
Run the data loading setup script for YeastLume's data preparation.

```shell
./scripts/preprocessing_setup.sh
```

---

## 2. Data Preparation and Preprocessing
BBDM expects data in a particular format for training, validating, and testing. To fulfill these requirements, allow the data preprocessing notebook to create individual, paired image files.

1. Populate the [`data-loading/raw-data`](data-loading/raw-data) and [`data-loading/unseen-raw-data`](data-loading/unseen-raw-data) directories with your (unique) multi-channel `.tif` files of `512x512` films. These files should be in standard format with bright-field at channel zero and fluorescence at channel one. If data loading fails, please [see the related README](data-loading/README.md).
2. Run the preprocessing script to automatically create the respective data folders.
```shell
./scripts/preprocessing.sh
```

*Note this script does not save notebook output other than the created data directory. In the event of errors, see Line 9 of [`preprocessing.sh`](scripts/preprocessing.sh).*

---

## 3. Remote Data Hosting via Rclone
Hosting the training data can be done via any service; however, this project was developed using Rclone—University of Groningen's suggested data software module for Hábrók—with Google Cloud Platform. In order to correctly setup Google Drive as a storage space in a headless environment, ensure the following steps are taken on a **new fork (or copy)* of the repository:

1. Create a new Google Cloud Platform project.
2. Under "APIs and Services" → "Enabled APIs & services", click "+ Enable APIs and services" and search for and enable the Google Drive API.
3. Go to "APIs and Services" → "Credentials" and configure a basic consent screen. Configure for external use.
4. Under "Google Auth Platform" → "Data Access", add these scopes to the "Manually add scopes", and leave the resulting boxes ticked: `https://www.googleapis.com/auth/docs,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive.metadata.readonly`. Note to save changes in the bottom of the pop-up.
5. Under "Google Auth Platform" → "Audience", add yourself as a test user (**ensure the GCP project, your Google Drive, and test user are all the same account**).
6. Under "APIs and Services" → "Credentials", click "+ Create credentials" and select for an OAuth Client ID of type "Desktop app".
7. From the pop-up, download the provided JSON from the bottom-left button.
8. Move the created JSON file into [`accounts/`](./accounts) for convenience. It should automatically be ignored from tracking at this point.
9. Follow the [University of Groningen Hábrók documentation](https://wiki.hpc.rug.nl/habrok/data_management/google_drive) (or a substitute host supporting Rclone), specifically the section *"Loading and configuring the application"*. Copy the appropriate variable names from the Google Cloud Project JSON file and authenticate. Name the remote `gdrive`. This configuration should be done on each machine Rclone is used to push and pull data.
10. Push the model input data to remote (if training the model on a different machine).
```shell
rclone copy -P data/ gdrive:YeastLume/data/
rclone copy -P data-unseen/ gdrive:YeastLume/data-unseen/
```

*Optional steps if involving multiple researchers/developers are included at the bottom of this document under [Remote Data Hosting via Rclone (cont.)](#remote-data-hosting-via-rclone-cont)*.

---

## 4. Training the VQGAN
BBDM expects a VQGAN checkpoint as input to the model. [The repository links options in its "Pretrained Models" section](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM). You can follow their instructions to find an appropriate checkpoint (VQGAN-4, by default).

However, in order to maximize the efficacy of BBDM, it is also possible to train a new VQGAN to learn to reconstruct the fluorescence images in `data/train/B`. The model does not have access to the test set. Prepare the model with the following steps:

1. Pull the model input data from remote (if necessary).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
```

2. Configure the Conda environment for the model ([taming-transformers](https://github.com/CompVis/taming-transformers/)). This script was developed for the University of Groningen's Hábrók, so many install instructions may break on other machines. Please be sure to commit any changes to `custom_vqgan.yaml` beforehand.
```shell
./scripts/gan_setup.sh
```

3. Run the model training script via a dedicated job. This uses the `custom_vqgan.yaml` template.
```shell
sbatch scripts/jobs/train_vqgan_job.sh
```

*In the event of failure, a smaller test job can be run via `sbatch scripts/jobs/train_debug_vqgan_job.sh`. This script is the same as `train_vqgan_job.sh`, only missing the actual Python call to build the model, and with much lighter GPU[-hour] usage.*

Train the VQGAN until results are as desired (the model will plateau in performance). Then the checkpoint to remote for safekeeping along with the related training and validation images, if desired. These commands assume only one training log exists. To push to remote otherwise, populate the expanded subpath manually.
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P $(ls -d taming-transformers/logs/*custom_vqgan)/checkpoints gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/checkpoints
rclone copy -P $(ls -d taming-transformers/logs/*custom_vqgan)/images gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/images
```
---

## 5. Training the BBDM Model
With a checkpoint to a VQGAN, train the BBDM model with the following steps:

1. Pull the model input data and the VQGAN checkpoint from remote (if necessary). Please note that the BBDM model expects the VQGAN `last.ckpt` checkpoint file under [`checkpoints/VQGAN/`](checkpoints/VQGAN/). If this file is not present, the model will fail to begin training.
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
rclone copy gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/checkpoints/last.ckpt checkpoints/VQGAN/
```

2. Configure the Conda environment for the model ([BBDM](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM)). This script was developed for the University of Groningen's Hábrók, so many install instructions may break on other machines. Please be sure to commit any changes to `environment.yml` beforehand.
```shell
./scripts/bbdm_setup.sh
```

3. Run the model training script via a dedicated job. This uses the `Template-LBBDM-f4.yaml` template (latent space BBDM with a latent depth 4).
```shell
sbatch scripts/jobs/train_bbdm_job.sh
```

*In the event of failure, a smaller test job can be run via `sbatch scripts/jobs/train_debug_bbdm_job.sh`. This script is the same as `train_bbdm_job.sh`, only missing the actual Python call to build the model, and with much lighter GPU[-hour] usage.*


4. Push the model training output to remote for safekeeping (use a more specific source filepath if you wish to exclude unnecessary data).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P BBDM/results/ gdrive:YeastLume/BBDM/results
```

---

## Running Inference on the BBDM Model

With the BBDM model trained, inference can be run on a selected checkpoint via two different test sets for evaluation.

The first is on data from the same `.tif` movies as the training and validation data, albeit from unseen individual frames.

The second test set is from unseen `.tif` movies. This set can be used to evaluate how the model performs in similar, but not exact conditions as the training data.

1. Pull both sets of remote data (if necessary).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data-unseen/ data-unseen/
```

2. Pull the best BBDM checkpoint from remote manually. For example, to clone epoch 100, do: `rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/BBDM/results/YeastLume/LBBDM-f4/checkpoint/top_model_epoch_100.pth checkpoints/BBDM`. The name of the checkpoint can be examined on Google Drive.

# Supplementary Install Information

---

## Remote Data Hosting via Rclone (cont.)

Note via [the Remote Data Hosting via Rclone section](#3-remote-data-hosting-via-rclone) that these steps are optional and are only needed if sharing a single Google Drive data setup.

1. Rename the JSON file in [`accounts/`](./accounts) to `drive.json`. 
2. Install [SOPS](https://getsops.io/docs/#download) and run the encryption script, which should create `key` in [`accounts/`](./accounts). This file is more obscure, and can more safely be passed in messages, as it does not directly link to any user space. Changes to the encrypted JSON file are tracked by Git.
```shell
./accounts/encrypt.sh
```
3. When running in a different copy of the repository, bring a copy of the correct `key` back into [`accounts/`](./accounts) manually, and run the decryption script.
```shell
./accounts/decrypt.sh
```

---

## Prevent Committing Output from Notebooks

Add this line to your shell configuration:
```shell
git config filter.strip-notebook-output.clean 'jupyter nbconvert --ClearOutputPreprocessor.enabled=True --to=notebook --stdin --stdout --log-level=ERROR'
```

**[Source](https://gist.github.com/33eyes/431e3d432f73371509d176d0dfb95b6e)**

Commit message:

Add note about necessary (empty) folders

README.md, after:

# YeastLume
Repository for the YeastLume data pipeline. Follow the directions below to configure the repository for your own purposes.

# Installation and Use
Below are instructions on how to train a BBDM model with paired bright-field and fluorescence data.

### Local Requirements
- 512x512 three-channel .tif films
- Python 3.11+ (with pip)
- Rclone *(if pushing/pulling data)*

### Remote Requirements
- SLURM job scheduler
- Unix/Linux shell with CUDA GPU available
- Conda (via Anaconda3/2024.02-1)
- Rclone *(if pushing/pulling data)*

---

## 1. Setup Data Preparation
Run the data loading setup script for YeastLume's data preparation.

```shell
./scripts/preprocessing_setup.sh
```

---

## 2. Data Preparation and Preprocessing
BBDM expects data in a particular format for training, validating, and testing. To fulfill these requirements, allow the data preprocessing notebook to create individual, paired image files.

1. Populate the [`data-loading/raw-data`](data-loading/raw-data) and [`data-loading/unseen-raw-data`](data-loading/unseen-raw-data) directories with your (unique) multi-channel `.tif` files of `512x512` films. These files should be in standard format with bright-field at channel zero and fluorescence at channel one. If data loading fails, please [see the related README](data-loading/README.md).
2. Run the preprocessing script to automatically create the respective data folders.
```shell
./scripts/preprocessing.sh
```

*Note this script does not save notebook output other than the created data directory. In the event of errors, see Line 9 of [`preprocessing.sh`](scripts/preprocessing.sh).*

---

## 3. Remote Data Hosting via Rclone
Hosting the training data can be done via any service; however, this project was developed using Rclone—University of Groningen's suggested data software module for Hábrók—with Google Cloud Platform. In order to correctly setup Google Drive as a storage space in a headless environment, ensure the following steps are taken on a **new fork (or copy)* of the repository:

1. Create a new Google Cloud Platform project.
2. Under "APIs and Services" → "Enabled APIs & services", click "+ Enable APIs and services" and search for and enable the Google Drive API.
3. Go to "APIs and Services" → "Credentials" and configure a basic consent screen. Configure for external use.
4. Under "Google Auth Platform" → "Data Access", add these scopes to the "Manually add scopes", and leave the resulting boxes ticked: `https://www.googleapis.com/auth/docs,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/drive.metadata.readonly`. Note to save changes in the bottom of the pop-up.
5. Under "Google Auth Platform" → "Audience", add yourself as a test user (**ensure the GCP project, your Google Drive, and test user are all the same account**).
6. Under "APIs and Services" → "Credentials", click "+ Create credentials" and select for an OAuth Client ID of type "Desktop app".
7. From the pop-up, download the provided JSON from the bottom-left button.
8. Move the created JSON file into [`accounts/`](./accounts) for convenience. It should automatically be ignored from tracking at this point.
9. Follow the [University of Groningen Hábrók documentation](https://wiki.hpc.rug.nl/habrok/data_management/google_drive) (or a substitute host supporting Rclone), specifically the section *"Loading and configuring the application"*. Copy the appropriate variable names from the Google Cloud Project JSON file and authenticate. Name the remote `gdrive`. This configuration should be done on each machine Rclone is used to push and pull data.
10. Push the model input data to remote (if training the model on a different machine).
```shell
rclone copy -P data/ gdrive:YeastLume/data/
rclone copy -P data-unseen/ gdrive:YeastLume/data-unseen/
```

*Optional steps if involving multiple researchers/developers are included at the bottom of this document under [Remote Data Hosting via Rclone (cont.)](#remote-data-hosting-via-rclone-cont)*.

---

## 4. Training the VQGAN
BBDM expects a VQGAN checkpoint as input to the model. [The repository links options in its "Pretrained Models" section](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM). You can follow their instructions to find an appropriate checkpoint (VQGAN-4, by default).

However, in order to maximize the efficacy of BBDM, it is also possible to train a new VQGAN to learn to reconstruct the fluorescence images in `data/train/B`. The model does not have access to the test set. Prepare the model with the following steps:

1. Pull the model input data from remote (if necessary).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
```

2. Configure the Conda environment for the model ([taming-transformers](https://github.com/CompVis/taming-transformers/)). This script was developed for the University of Groningen's Hábrók, so many install instructions may break on other machines. Please be sure to commit any changes to `custom_vqgan.yaml` beforehand.
```shell
./scripts/gan_setup.sh
```

3. Run the model training script via a dedicated job. This uses the `custom_vqgan.yaml` template.
```shell
sbatch scripts/jobs/train_vqgan_job.sh
```

*In the event of failure, a smaller test job can be run via `sbatch scripts/jobs/train_debug_vqgan_job.sh`. This script is the same as `train_vqgan_job.sh`, only missing the actual Python call to build the model, and with much lighter GPU[-hour] usage.*

Train the VQGAN until results are as desired (the model will plateau in performance). Then the checkpoint to remote for safekeeping along with the related training and validation images, if desired. These commands assume only one training log exists. To push to remote otherwise, populate the expanded subpath manually.
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P $(ls -d taming-transformers/logs/*custom_vqgan)/checkpoints gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/checkpoints
rclone copy -P $(ls -d taming-transformers/logs/*custom_vqgan)/images gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/images
```
---

## 5. Training the BBDM Model
With a checkpoint to a VQGAN, train the BBDM model with the following steps:

1. Pull the model input data and the VQGAN checkpoint from remote (if necessary). Please note that the BBDM model expects the VQGAN `last.ckpt` checkpoint file under [`checkpoints/VQGAN/`](checkpoints/VQGAN/). If this file is not present, the model will fail to begin training.
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
rclone copy gdrive:YeastLume/VQGAN/checkpoints/last.ckpt checkpoints/VQGAN/
```

2. Configure the Conda environment for the model ([BBDM](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM)). This script was developed for the University of Groningen's Hábrók, so many install instructions may break on other machines. Please be sure to commit any changes to `environment.yml` beforehand.
```shell
./scripts/bbdm_setup.sh
```

3. Run the model training script via a dedicated job. This uses the `Template-LBBDM-f4.yaml` template (latent space BBDM with a latent depth 4).
```shell
sbatch scripts/jobs/train_bbdm_job.sh
```

*In the event of failure, a smaller test job can be run via `sbatch scripts/jobs/train_debug_bbdm_job.sh`. This script is the same as `train_bbdm_job.sh`, only missing the actual Python call to build the model, and with much lighter GPU[-hour] usage.*


4. Push the model training output to remote for safekeeping (use a more specific source filepath if you wish to exclude unnecessary data).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P BBDM/results/ gdrive:YeastLume/BBDM/results
```

---

## Running Inference on the BBDM Model

With the BBDM model trained, inference can be run on a selected checkpoint via two different test sets for evaluation.

The first is on data from the same `.tif` movies as the training and validation data, albeit from unseen individual frames.

The second test set is from unseen `.tif` movies. This set can be used to evaluate how the model performs in similar, but not exact conditions as the training data.

1. Pull both sets of remote data (if necessary).
```shell
module load rclone/1.66.0
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data/ data/
rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/data-unseen/ data-unseen/
```

2. Ensure that necessary (empty) folders exist for the unseen movies test.
```shell
mkdir -p data-unseen/train/A
mkdir -p data-unseen/train/B
mkdir -p data-unseen/val/A
mkdir -p data-unseen/val/B
```

3. Pull the best BBDM checkpoint from remote manually. For example, to clone epoch 100, do: `rclone copy -P gdrive:YeastLume/BBDM/results/YeastLume/LBBDM-f4/checkpoint/top_model_epoch_100.pth checkpoints/BBDM`. The name of the checkpoint can be examined on Google Drive.

4. Run evaluation script. This will write test results in the preexisting BBDM-related subdirectory, as well as a new one named "YeastLume-Unseen".
```shell
sbatch scripts/jobs/eval_seen_bbdm_job.sh
```

# Supplementary Install Information

---

## Remote Data Hosting via Rclone (cont.)

Note via [the Remote Data Hosting via Rclone section](#3-remote-data-hosting-via-rclone) that these steps are optional and are only needed if sharing a single Google Drive data setup.

1. Rename the JSON file in [`accounts/`](./accounts) to `drive.json`. 
2. Install [SOPS](https://getsops.io/docs/#download) and run the encryption script, which should create `key` in [`accounts/`](./accounts). This file is more obscure, and can more safely be passed in messages, as it does not directly link to any user space. Changes to the encrypted JSON file are tracked by Git.
```shell
./accounts/encrypt.sh
```
3. When running in a different copy of the repository, bring a copy of the correct `key` back into [`accounts/`](./accounts) manually, and run the decryption script.
```shell
./accounts/decrypt.sh
```

---

## Prevent Committing Output from Notebooks

Add this line to your shell configuration:
```shell
git config filter.strip-notebook-output.clean 'jupyter nbconvert --ClearOutputPreprocessor.enabled=True --to=notebook --stdin --stdout --log-level=ERROR'
```

**[Source](https://gist.github.com/33eyes/431e3d432f73371509d176d0dfb95b6e)**
