data-loading/README.md, before:

This directory loads the paired image data required for the BBDM model from three-channel `.tif` movies. Specifically, it creates sets of data in the project root (in [`data/`](../data)), in the following format:
```
data/train/A    # training reference (bright-field)
data/train/B    # training ground truth (fluorescence)
data/val/A      # validating reference (bright-field)
data/val/B      # validating ground truth (fluorescence)
data/test/A     # testing reference (bright-field)
data/test/B     # testing ground truth (fluorescence)
```

A configuration file is then utilized to point the model to the correct path for training, validation, and testing data. Please see [the homepage of the BBDM repository](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM) for more information. Roughly 80% of frames are used for training, 10% for validating, and 10% for testing, without overlap.

The [single frame testing notebook](test_single_frame.ipynb) can be used to debug and try new logic, which should be brought forward into the [full preprocessing notebook](data_preprocessing.ipynb). Please see the files [`raw-data/README.md`](raw-data/README.md) and [`example-data/README.md`](example-data/README.md) if more context is required in terms of input data.

Commit message:

update supplementary READMEs with new repository structure information

data-loading/README.md, after:

This directory loads the paired image data required for the BBDM model from `512x512` multi-channel `.tif` movies. It organizes model data in the project root; it populates [`data/`](../data) (with additional test data in [`full-test-data/`](../full-test-data)) in the following format:
```
data/train/A    # training reference (bright-field)
data/train/B    # training ground truth (fluorescence)
data/val/A      # validating reference (bright-field)
data/val/B      # validating ground truth (fluorescence)
data/test/A     # testing reference (bright-field)
data/test/B     # testing ground truth (fluorescence)
```

A configuration file is then utilized to point the model to the correct path for training, validation, and testing data. Please see [the homepage of the BBDM repository](https://github.com/xuekt98/BBDM) for more information.

The [single frame testing notebook](test_single_frame.ipynb) can be used to debug and try new logic, which should be brought forward into the [full preprocessing notebook](data_preprocessing.ipynb). Please see the files [`raw-data/README.md`](raw-data/README.md) and [`example-data/README.md`](example-data/README.md) if more context is required in terms of input data.
